README.md, before:

# CAN 101
Tutorials for people new to REVO programming.

This will cover not only how to program ATmegas, but also all the things you need to know to be a [good person!](NULL "Well, not really. They will probably make you a worse person") 
*NOTE: Don't click the link, it is only hovertext (check the FAQ)*

Clone this repo to get example code for the tutorials! Follow along! Also make bug requests for typos and whatnot, or make pull-requests if you are [super nice](NULL "<3")!

## FAQ
#### I Don't know C, What do I do?
I will work on writing a quick learn-C tutorial thingy. But it won't go too in-depth. If you really want to learn, there are a ton of great resources out there!

Learn C the Hard Way is a pretty good starter, and honestly just reading anything you can get your hands on will help.

#### Why isn't there a tutorial for (INSERT HERE)
It is actually time consuming to write tutorials. I will probably get around to it eventually if it is important.

#### Why are there links that lead to (NULL)?
These are hover-texts! A jank way of forcing github to display text when you hover. They require a link, so that is set to NULL! 

But seriously, don't click unless it says (LINK) because otherwise it will send you to a non-existent page or some random page that I find funny.

#### I am offended by your hover-texts
This is not a question.

Commit message:

Added note about useful files

README.md, after:

# CAN 101
Tutorials for people new to REVO programming.

This will cover not only how to program ATmegas, but also all the things you need to know to be a [good person!](NULL "Well, not really. They will probably make you a worse person") 
*NOTE: Don't click the link, it is only hovertext (check the FAQ)*

Clone this repo to get example code for the tutorials! Follow along! Also make bug requests for typos and whatnot, or make pull-requests if you are [super nice](NULL "<3")!

Some useful files are also in the main folder, such as the ATmega datasheet and the pinouts in a [readable form](NULL "The datasheet has a terrible format for the pinouts, and it is really hard to read. I painstakingly transcribed them into a text document.")

## FAQ
#### I Don't know C, What do I do?
I will work on writing a quick learn-C tutorial thingy. But it won't go too in-depth. If you really want to learn, there are a ton of great resources out there!

Learn C the Hard Way is a pretty good starter, and honestly just reading anything you can get your hands on will help.

#### Why isn't there a tutorial for (INSERT HERE)
It is actually time consuming to write tutorials. I will probably get around to it eventually if it is important.

#### Why are there links that lead to (NULL)?
These are hover-texts! A jank way of forcing github to display text when you hover. They require a link, so that is set to NULL! 

But seriously, don't click unless it says (LINK) because otherwise it will send you to a non-existent page or some random page that I find funny.

#### I am offended by your hover-texts
This is not a question.
